hi today we're going to talk about
Pascal's wager and Pascal's mugging this
is necessarily going to touch on
religious topics pretty heavily actually
and I'm just gonna say at the beginning
of the video that personally I don't
believe that any god or gods have ever
existed and I'm not going to pretend
otherwise in this video so be forewarned
if that's likely to bother you so as you
may know Pascal was a 17th century
philosopher who was interested in
amongst other things the question of the
existence of the Christian God various
philosophers at the time were arguing
that God didn't exist and there was a
lot of discussion going on about the
various kinds of evidence for and
against God in the world but there's
this thing that's quite common when
people think about religious questions
where it feels sort of unsatisfying to
talk about worldly evidence as if you
were considering some everyday question
there's a feeling that these
supernatural concepts are very grand and
mysterious they're special and so just
straightforwardly considering the
evidence for and against God is not the
right way to do things this is of course
encouraged by religious thinking the
idea that some hypotheses aren't subject
to the usual rules of evidence and logic
is pretty appealing if you want to
advocate for an idea that doesn't fare
very well by those standards
I suspect Pascal may have felt something
like that because his position was that
reason has nothing to say about the
question of whether or not God exists
it's sort of an unknowable thing and
instead he proposed that we should make
a wager we should think about it like
this there are two possibilities either
the Christian God exists or he doesn't
and reason gives us no way to choose
between those we have two options
available to us either we can live
according to God's laws and act as
though we believe or we can not do that
so we have a sort of payoff matrix here
with four sections if God exists and we
believe in him then we get infinite
reward in heaven if God exists and we
don't believe in him we get infinite
punishment in hell if God doesn't exist
and we believe in him then we pay some
costs you know there are some rules we
have to follow and so on and if he
doesn't exist and we don't believe in
him then maybe we get a few perks from
not believing like having a lion on
Sundays and being right Pascal's point
is that this payoff matrix is completely
dominated by the case in which God
exists because we're talking about
infinite rewards and infinite
punishments as opposed to the other case
with these very finite costs
benefits so regardless of the evidence
Pascal argues we should believe in God
or at least act like it because it's
just the sensible bet to make this is
really kind of a nice argument from
Pascal's perspective because it doesn't
need evidence at all no finite earthly
evidence can outweigh infinite
supernatural payoffs it feels like the
kind of clean abstract reasoning that
you're supposed to do when thinking
about the supernatural all of this hard
work looking at history and psychology
and science and trying to figure out
where the ideas of religion come from
and whether our world seems like the
kind of world with a God in it it's
long-winded confusing it's it's just
messy but here we just have a clean
argument that says we should believe in
God or at least act like it and that
seems very neat no evidence required so
consider now Pascal is walking down the
street and he's stopped by a shady
looking man who says give me a wallet I
would prefer not to do you even have a
weapon no UK laws are very strict about
that but I don't need one because I'm
God your God yep I'm God and
Christianity got a lot of things wrong
about me my forgiving nature my infinite
mercy and so on but the infinite torture
thing is legit and if you don't give me
your wallet right now I will torture you
for eternity in the afterlife now if
you're Pascal you're in kind of a
difficult situation because the fact
that it seems very unlikely that this
murder actually is God is not meant to
be part of your calculation your
argument is one a pure logic it works
independently of any evidence you didn't
need to look for evidence of the
Christian God and you don't need to look
for evidence that this mother is God
either so you kind of have to give him
your wallet and now you're really in
trouble because of course when this gets
out there's gonna be a line around the
block of lsaps deities asking for
handouts how are you going to deal with
this endless stream of fizzy gods well
one thing you can do is you can play the
muggers off against one another you can
bring in two of them and say listen you
say that you're going to torture me
forever if I don't give you my wallet
and you say the same thing I only have
one wallet so it looks like whatever I
do I'm going to be tortured forever by
somebody and if I'm going to be
infinitely tortured anyway well two
times infinity is still just infinity so
I may as well hang on to the wallet now
get the hell out of my house all right
next to no doubt these self-proclaimed
deities may try to argue that they have
some reason why they are in fact a real
deity
this other mugger is just a random guy
who's pretending but that's all worldly
evidence which you've decided isn't
required for your argument and the
muggers don't really want you to become
interested in evidence because well the
evidence points very strongly towards
none of them being real gods so this is
a better position to be in you're still
spending a lot of your time arguing with
charlatans but at least you still have
your wallet and you don't actually have
to pair them up against each other right
you can just make up a deity when
someone comes in pretending to be a god
you can say oh well there's this other
God who demands exactly the opposite
thing from you a goddess actually and
she's very powerful but she goes to a
different school
you would know her really yeah she lives
in Canada she's only present obviously
but she lives in Canada anyway she says
that I'm not to give you the wallet and
if I do then she'll torture me forever
in the afterlife I think yeah so you can
solve a lot of these problems by
inventing gods arbitrarily and of course
this applies just as well to the
original version of Pascal's wager
because although it's implied that this
payoff matrix has enumerated all of the
possibilities and in a sense it has the
Christian God either exists or it
doesn't nonetheless those may not be the
only things that effect the payoffs for
any given God you can take the God down
flip it and reverse it and say what
about ante God who wants me to do the
exact opposite and promises the exact
opposite consequences now you can see
that they cancel out somebody who's
arguing for the existence of the first
God might say okay but this anti God is
just made up which I mean yeah it is
it's true that the situation isn't
really symmetrical someone might think
God is more likely than anti God because
of evidence from the Bible and there's
no such thing as the anti Bible and so
on the point is though we're back to
talking about the evidence that's really
the problem I have with Pascal's wager
the way it uses infinite costs and
infinite benefits to completely override
our necessarily finite evidence but what
if the costs and benefits aren't
infinite just very very large that ends
up being a much more interesting
question on one end of the scale we can
easily name numbers so large that no
amount of evidence anyone could ever
actually gather in their lifetime could
have an impact on the conclusion we can
specify costs and benefits that are
technically finite but that still feel
very much like a Pascal's wager on the
other end of the scale if you come
across a bet that pays out 10
two one on an event with a probability
of one in a hundred that's a very good
bet to take someone could complain that
it's a Pascal's wager to bet on an
unlikely outcome just because the payoff
is so high but if you take enough bets
like that you're sure to become very
rich in the same way if there's a button
which has a one-in-a-million chance of
starting a global thermonuclear war it's
still worth expending significant
resources to stop that button being
pressed one in a million isn't much but
the cost of a nuclear war is really high
I don't think that's a Pascal's wager
either the difference seems to come in
somewhere in the gap between very small
probabilities of very large costs and
benefits and really extremely small
probabilities of near infinite costs and
benefits so why are we talking about
this what does this have to do with AI
safety well suppose somebody stops you
in the street and says hey if we ever
create powerful artificial general
intelligence then that will have a
tremendous impact in fact the future of
the whole of humanity hinges on it if we
get it right we could have human
flourishing for the rest of time if we
get it wrong we could have human
extinction or worse regardless of how
likely superhuman AGI is the potential
impact is so high that it makes AI
safety research tremendously important
so give me your wallet it's been claimed
by some that this is more or less what
AI safety as a field is doing this is
kind of an interesting point there's any
safety advocates are we victims of
Pascal's mugging or are we in fact
Pascal's miners ourselves well if people
were saying these AI risks may be
extremely unlikely but the consequences
of getting AI wrong are so huge that
it's worth spending a lot of resources
on regardless of the probabilities so we
don't even need to consider the evidence
well I would consider that to be a
Pascal's wager style bad argument but
what I actually hear is not that what I
hear is more like look we're not
completely sure about this it's quite
possible that we're wrong but
considering the enormity of what's at
stake it's definitely worth allocating
more resources to AI safety than we
currently are that sounds pretty similar
but that's mostly because natural
language is extremely vague when talking
about uncertainty there's an enormous
difference in the probabilities being
talked about in the same way if when you
talk to AI safety researchers they said
things like well I think the chance of
any of this ever being relevant are
really extremely tiny it seems more or
less impossible to me but I've decided
to work on it anyway
because the potential costs and benefits
are so unimaginably vast then yeah I'd
be a little concerned that they might be
victims of Pascal's mugging but when you
ask AI safety researchers they don't
think that the probability of their work
ever becoming relevant is very tiny
they don't necessarily think it's huge
either maybe not even more than 50% but
it's not so small that you have to rely
on the unimaginable vastness of the
consequences in order to make the
argument to borrow a metaphor from
Stuart Russell suppose you're part of a
team working on building a bridge and
you believe you've found a flaw in the
design that could cause the structure to
fail catastrophically maybe the disaster
would only happen if there's a very rare
combination of weather conditions and
there's only a one in a hundred chance
that those conditions will ever happen
during the course of the bridges
expected lifespan and further suppose
that you're not completely sure of your
calculations because this kind of thing
is complicated maybe you only give
yourself a 40% chance of being right
about this so you go to the civil
engineer in charge of the project and
you say I think there's a serious risk
with this bridge design do you think the
bridges gonna collapse probably not no
but I'm about 40 percent sure that
there's a design flaw which would give
this bridge a 1 in 100 chance of
catastrophic failure so you're telling
me that in the event of a scenario which
is very unlikely to happen the bridge
might collapse and you yourself admit
that you're more likely to be wrong than
right about this stop wasting my time
but if the bridge collapses it could
kill a lot of people I think this is a
Pascal's mugging don't try to get me to
ignore the low probabilities just by
threatening very large consequences
obviously that isn't what would happen
no civil engineer is going to accept a 1
in 250 chance of catastrophic failure
for a major piece of infrastructure
because civil engineers have a healthy
organizational culture around safety
what it comes down to again is the
difference between different levels of
improbability the chance of an AGI
catastrophe may not be very big but it's
much much larger than the chance that a
mugger is actually a god and what about
our anti-god tactic finding the opposite
risk does that still work like what if
we consider the possibility that there's
another opposite design flaw in the
bridge which might cause it to collapse
unless we don't spend extra time
evaluating the safety if that is not
what just look at the schematic with you
and what if working on AI safety
actually ends up making the risks worse
somehow I think this actually is worth
considering unintended consequences are
a real problem after all speaking
generally there's
clear argument that the future is very
important and that we're probably able
to have a very big impact on it but it's
hard to know for sure whether that
impact will be positive or negative for
any given course of action prediction is
very difficult as they say especially
about the future and the further into
the future we look the more difficult it
gets like imagine if you lived in the
year 1900 and you had some insight that
made you realize that nuclear weapons
were possible and nuclear war was a risk
you'd hope that you could use that
understanding to reduce the risk but it
would certainly be possible to make
things worse by accident in the case of
AI safety though I don't see that being
anywhere near as much of a concern we're
heading towards AI regardless and it
seems very unlikely that thinking about
safety would be more dangerous than not
thinking about safety it's definitely
possible to make things worse while
trying to make them better but you can't
avoid that by never trying to make
things better I guess my point is
there's just no getting around the messy
confusing complicated work of looking at
and thinking about the evidence any
argument that doesn't rely on the
evidence will work equally well whatever
the truth is so at the end of the day
that kind of thing isn't going to give
you an answer you have to just stare at
the bridge design and really think you
have to actually do the engineering and
that's something I'm trying to get
across with this channel you won't find
me saying never mind the evidence ai
safety is important because it could
have huge consequences what I do on this
channel is I try to show you some of the
evidence in some of the arguments and
let you think about the situation and
draw your own conclusions it can be
tricky and involved it requires some
thought but it has the advantage of
being the only thing that has any chance
of actually getting the right answer so
thanks for watching
[Music]
as my wonderful patrons will know the
alignment newsletter is a weekly
publication from Rowan char which I read
every week to stay up to date with
what's going on in here safety and now
I'm recording myself reading it out and
publishing that as the alignment
newsletter podcast it's aimed at
researchers so it's a fair bit more
technical than this channel but if
you're interested in getting 15 minutes
of AI safety news in your earholes each
week check the link in the description
I'm never going to put ads or sponsors
on that podcast and that's largely
thanks to my patrons in this video I'm
especially thanking Chris canal thank
you so much for your support Chris thank
you to all of my patrons and thank you
for watching I'll see you next time
[Music]
little costume changes